JavaScript Interview Test (Set 2: 50 Questions)
🧠 Basics (1–10)
Q.1) What is the difference between var, let, and const?
ans : var is function scoped
      let and const are block scoped.

      var is hoisted as well as initialized with undefined.
      let and const are hoisted but not initialized with undefined 
      and when we are use this variable then this will give us reference error not initialized
      due to the Temporal dead Zone.

Q.2) What does typeof null return, and why?
ans : it returns "object" because this is a loop hole of javascript.

Q.3)Explain hoisting in JavaScript with examples?
ans : hoisting is a process in which the variables and function declaration are moved to the top of their block.

Q.4)What are truthy and falsy values in JavaScript?
ans : falsy values are "",0,false,null,undefined 
      else all are truthy values.

Q.5)How does JavaScript handle type coercion?
ans : Javascript handle type coercion like 5 + "1" = 6;
                                           "5" + 1 = "51"

Q.6)What is the difference between == and ===?
ans : == only compares the values not type
      === compares both values and types.

Q.7)How do you check if a variable is an array?
ans : Array.isArray();

Q.8)What are template literals and how are they useful?
ans : template literals are used to create the dynamic string.
      template literals are also used for the two line string

Q.9)Explain the use of the in operator?
ans : in operator checks if property exist or not

Q.10)How does the delete operator work on objects?
ans : delete operator remove the property from the objects.

🧩 Functions and Scope (11–20)
Q.11)What is lexical scope in JavaScript?
ans : lexical scope is a scope of a variable in which it is accessible to use.

Q.12)What is the difference between a function declaration and function expression?
ans : function declaration is simple syntax with function keyword
      function declaration is hoisted
      function declaration have their own this.

      function expression have the syntax in which the function is assigned to a variable
      function expression are not hoisted
      function expressions with arrow functions doesn't have their own this.

Q.13)How do arrow functions differ from regular functions?
ans : arrow functions have more easy and shorter syntax.
      arrow functions doesn't have their own this.
      arrow functions are also used as a callback
      arrow functions are not hoisted
      can't be used as constructors and lack arguments object.

      regular functions have more harder syntax as compare to arrow
      regular functions have their own this
      regular functions are hoisted as well

Q.14)What are IIFEs (Immediately Invoked Function Expressions)?
ans : IIFEs are functions that are executed immediately.
      IIFEs are also used to private variables creation
      IIFES are also useful for memory management

Q.15)How does the this keyword behave in arrow functions?
ans : arrow functions doesn't have their own this 
      They refer this to their parent

Q.16)Explain closures and provide a real-world use case?
ans : closures are the functions which remembers the variables of its outer function even if the outer function completes its execution.

    function closure(){
        let count = 0;
        return function increment(){
             count++;
        }
    }

    let counter1 = closure();
    let counter2 = closure();


Q.17)Can you reassign a function to another variable? What happens to the original?
ans : Assigning a function to another variable copies the reference, not the original variable.

Q.18)What is the difference between .call(), .apply(), and .bind()?
ans : These all are used to set the conext of this to the functinon
      call: It is used invokes immediately and accepts the arguments seperately  functin.call(object,argument1);
      apply : It is used invokes immediately and accepts the arguments as an array function.apply(object,[argument1]);
      bind : It is used to the result for later use and accets the arguments seperately  let result = function.bind(Object,argument1);

Q.19)What is the purpose of the arguments object?
ans : arguments object is a collection of all the argument passed to the function
Not available in arrow functions.

Q.20)How do default parameters work in JavaScript?
ans : default parameters are used to assign a value when the value is not passed to a function.

🔁 Loops, Arrays, and Objects (21–30)
Q.21)What is the difference between for...in and for...of?
ans : for...in loop is used to iterate over the properties of an object
      for...of loop is used to iterate over the values of the array.

Q.22)What are array methods like .map(), .filter(), and .reduce() used for?
ans : map() is used to transform the elements of the array returns a new array with same length
      filter() is used to filter the elements of the array accordng to the given condition returns a new filtered array.
      reduce() is used to return a calculated single value.

Q.23)How do you merge two objects in JavaScript?
ans :  function merge(obj1,obj2){
        
        let result = {};

        for(key in obj1){
            result[key] = obj1[key];
        }
        
        for(key in obj2){
            result[key] = obj2[key];
        }
        
        return result;
}

const obj1 = {name : "anmol", age: 26};
const obj2 = {surname : "dhama", age2: 25};

  console.log(merge(obj1,obj2));

Q.24)What happens when you clone an object using Object.assign()?
ans : It will only clone the higher level properties  and the reference of the nested properties.
 It creates a shallow copy.

Q.25)What is a shallow copy vs deep copy?
ans : shallow copy is a copy of the higher level properties and reference of the nested properties.
      deep copy is a copy of the complete object 

Q.26)Explain how destructuring works in arrays and objects?
ans :  destructuring allow the developers to assign the values of the array and properties of the object on the fly.

Q.27)What are computed property names in objects?
ans : let key = 'name';
let obj = {[key]: 'Anmol'}; // {name: "Anmol"}

Q.28)What are Set and Map in JavaScript?
ans : Map is used to stored the data in key value pair and keys are of any data type.

      Set is used to stored the unique values.
      Set uses add(), Map uses set() and get().

Q.29)How does optional chaining (?.) work?
ans : optional chaining is used to remove the complexity of the if else block

Q.30)What is the purpose of the spread operator ...?
ans : spread operator is used to expand the values of the array
Also used in object merging:

⏱️ Asynchronous JavaScript (31–40)
Q.31)What is the event loop in JavaScript?
ans : Event loop is a mechanism which is responsibel for the asynchronous execution of the tasks in javascript
      It has the microtask queue which holds the callbacks of promises  higher priority
       and macrotask queue which holds the callbacks of the timers,fs.module etc  lower priority
       event loop is continously watching the callstack and callback queues whenever the callstack is empty event loop moves the task from the callback queues into callstack for execution.


Q.32)What are microtasks and macrotasks in the event loop?
ans : the microtask queue which holds the callbacks of promises  higher priority
       and macrotask queue which holds the callbacks of the timers,fs.module etc  lower priority

Q.33)How do Web APIs work with async tasks?
ans : Web APIs like setTimeout ans SetInterval is used in the asynchronous exection  of the tasks

Q.34)Explain how setTimeout() and setInterval() work?
ans : setTimeout() is accepting a callback and a timer the callback is execuited after the dalay which was given in miliseconds.
      setInterval() is accepting a callback and a timer the callback is execcuted after every interval which was given in miliseconds.

Q.35)How do Promises resolve race conditions?
ans : Promises don't resolve race conditions automatically, but can be used with techniques like locks, Promise.race() to handle them.

Q.36)What does Promise.all() vs Promise.race() vs Promise.allSettled() do?
ans : Promise.all() accepts the array of promises as an argument it will return the resolve if all the promises are resolved and rejects if any one is rejected
     Promise.race() also accepts the array of promises as an argument it will return the first settled promise not matter resolved or reject
     Promise.allSettled() also accepts the array of promises as an argument it will wait till all the promises are settled and return the array of fulfilled values, rejected reason

Q.37)What are the benefits of using async/await over Promises?
ans : async/await is used for the sequencial execution of the code within the async function
      if we wants to wait for the response of any statement then we use await in front of that statement
      async function returns the promise every time

Q.38)What is a callback function? Why is it used?
ans : callback functions are the function which are passed as an argument to another function for later execution.
      When the promises and async/await are not introduced the only way to handle the asynchronous tasks are callbacks
 
Q.39)What is callback hell and how can you avoid it?
ans : callback hell is a process when the nested callbacks are passed to the functions.
       They are very tough for debugging
       Use Promises or async/await to avoid it.

Q.40)Can you use await outside of an async function?
ans : No you cannot use await outside the async function.

🚀 Advanced Concepts (41–50)
Q.41)What are JavaScript Engines? Name a few?
ans : Javascript uses the v8 engine build by the google for chrome browser
V8 (Chrome, Node.js), SpiderMonkey (Firefox), Chakra (older Edge), JavaScriptCore (Safari).

Q.42)How does memory management work in JavaScript?
ans : Javascript uses the automatic garbage collector for the memory management
      But it is also the responsibilty of developers to maintain some important rules like
      - Do not create unnecessary global variables
      - Use the closures correctly
      - must remove the event listeners
      - must clear the timers set by the setTimeout or setInterval
      - use IIFE if possible
      - use weakMap and weakSet for data storing because they have weak reference in memory

Q.43)What is tail call optimization?
ans : It is a technique in the functions are set at the bottom of another function for the optimization.

Q.44)What is the difference between prototypal inheritance and classical inheritance?
ans : Prototypal inheritance is a inheritance are chaining as a prototype like Array.prototype.map;
      classibal inheritance is a inheritance of child class has all the properties of parent class.

Q.45)What are Object.freeze(), Object.seal(), and Object.preventExtensions()?
ans : Object.freeze() stops the objects for adding new properties as well as for modification in existing properties
      Object.seal() stops the objects for adding new properties but allow for modification in existing ones

Q.46)What is the Symbol.iterator?
ans : Symbol.iterator is used for the iterables created using symbol data type.

Q.47)How does garbage collection work in JavaScript?
ans : javascript uses automatic garbage collection using the algorithm of mark and sweep
       First the reachable variables are marked and then free the memory of unmarked variables.

Q.48)Explain how event delegation works in the DOM?
ans : event delegation works as the event is listens by all the nodes even the event is triggered by a signle node.

Q.49)What is the difference between mutation and immutability in JavaScript?
ans : mutation is concept in which the values are modifies after the initialization for eg : array, number
      Immutability is concept in which the values are not allow for modification after initialization for eg: strings

Q.50)What is debouncing and throttling? How do they help in performance optimization?
ans : debouncing is technique which is used to limit any function to executes allow after a time and the timer is starts from the beginning if the users tries to trigger within the time range
     throttling is also used to limit the function execution allow after a time but the timer is not restart from the beginning.
      

