Core Concepts & Fundamentals (1–15)
Q.1) What is hoisting and how does it affect variable/function declarations?
ans : Hoisting is a technique in which the variables and functions declarations are moved to the top the a block.

Q.2) How does JavaScript’s typeof operator behave with different types?
ans : typeof null  gives "object"
      typeof 1  gives "number"
      typeof "" gives "string"
      typeof true gives "boolean"
      typesof [] gives "object"

Q.3) What is the difference between == and === in JavaScript?
ans : == compares only the values not data type
      === compares both values and data types

Q.4) Explain how JavaScript handles equality comparison of objects?
ans : Object comparison using == or === compares references, not values. Two different objects are only equal if they refer to the exact same reference.

Q.5) What is the difference between let, const, and var?
ans : let and const are block scoped, let and const are hoisted but not initialized with undefined and whenever you try to access at this stage this is a temporal dead zone
       var is function scoped, var is hoisted as well as initialized with a undefined value

Q.6) How does JavaScript’s garbage collection work?
ans : garbage collection works on the algorithm mark and sweep in which first mark all the reachable objects
     then release the memory of unreachable elements.

     hard for the gc to release memory if
       the variable is globally declared
       Closures are not used correctly
       Timers are not clared
       event listeners are not removed


Q.7) What is the difference between an expression and a statement?
ans : An expression produces a value (e.g., 2 + 2).
      A statement performs an action (e.g., if, for, return).

Q.8) How do template literals work and what are tagged templates?
ans : Template literals use backticks `` and allow interpolation using ${} and multiline strings.
Tagged templates allow you to parse template literals with a function before processing.  not understand clearly

Q.9) What is the purpose of the void operator in JavaScript?
ans : void evaluates an expression and returns undefined. Commonly used in bookmarks or to suppress return values.

Q.10) What are Immediately Invoked Function Expressions (IIFE) and why use them?
ans : IIFEs are the functions which are invoked immediately just after the creation
       They are also useful to create a private variable
       They are friendly to the garbage collector to immdiately release the functions memory
        (function(){
            console.log("anmol");
        })()
        They are also useful when you want to do some heavy calculations

Q.11) What are the falsy values in JavaScript?
ans  : falsy values are 0 , "", false , null , undefined,NaN.

Q.12)How can you convert a number to a string and vice versa?
ans : 1) .toString()
      2) compare with a "" + number

      string to number
      1) Number(str);
      2) parseInt(str);
      3) parseFloat(str);
      4) +str

Q.13)Explain the difference between call stack overflow and memory leak?
ans : callstack overflow means the callstack have the capacity to holds the execution context
      When the default capacity reaches it will overflows

      memory leaf is a problem when the memory given to the variables and functions are not released even if they are not used in the code

Q.14)What is the difference between a global variable and a local variable?
ans : global variables are declared at the top of the file and accessible in the complete file
      local variables are declared within a block and are only accessible inside the block

Q.15)What is the difference between function declaration and function expression?
ans : function declaration are the functions which are created using simple syntax and not assign to any vairable
      They have their own this, arguments,super
      They are hoisted and also initialized with undefined
       
      function expression are the functions which are assigned to the varibles
      They have not their own this, arguments, super
      They are not hoisted

Functions, Scope & Closures (16–30)
Q.16)What is a closure, and why are closures useful in JavaScript?
ans : closures are the functions which remembers the variables of its outer function even if the outer function completes its execution

      they are useful to create private variables
      they are  useful in currying as well as create a counter.

Q.17)What is the difference between arrow functions and regular functions?
ans : arrow functions have the shorter syntax
      arrow functions doesn't have their own this, arguments, super
      They borrow this from their parent
      arrow functions are not even hoisted
      arrow functions are used as a callback

      regular functions have the simpler syntax
      regular functions have their own this, arguments, super
      regular functions are hoisted

Q.18)How do you create private methods or variables in JavaScript?
ans : We use closrues, symbols, IIFE to create private variables in javascript
      We also use sealed or freezed objects

Q.19)Explain how the this keyword works in arrow functions?
ans : arrow functions borrow this from their parents

Q.20)What is a higher-order function? Give an example.
ans : higher order functions are the function which takes another function as a argument or return a function
or both

Q.21)What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous iteration?
ans : synchronous iterations are the iterations which are executed sequencialy
     asynchronous iterations are executed parallely

Q.22)How can you debounce or throttle a function?
ans : debounce is technique which is used to limit a function exection till the timer not stop if user tries to trigger this function within the time then the timer restart from the beginning
    throttling is technique which is used to limit a function exection till the timer not stop but the timer not restarted in this case

Q.23)What happens when you return a function from another function?
ans : You create a closure. The returned function retains access to its lexical scope.

Q.24)Explain how default parameters work in ES6 functions.
ans : default parameters used to assign a values to the arguments when the arguments are not provided at the time of function invocation

Q.25)What is the difference between function.prototype.call() and function.prototype.apply()?
ans : both call and apply are used to set the context of this to a function
      call invokes immediately, accepts the arguments seperately function.call(object,argument1,argument2);
      apply also invokes immediately, accpets the arguments as a array function.apply(object, [argument1,argument2]);

Q.26)How does the arguments object work inside functions?
ans : inside the function arguments object holds all the arguments that are passed to that function

Q.27)How do you implement a function that can be called with variable number of arguments?
ans : let number_of_arguments =  ()=>{
      console.log(5);
}

number_of_arguments();

Q.28)What are generator functions? How do you pause and resume execution?
ans : generator functions are the functions which are yield the statements on demand
      if you want then use yield keyword to execute the next statement.

Q.29)How can you create a function that remembers previous invocations?
ans : you can use closure

      function counter() {
  let count = 0;
  return function () {
    count++;
    return count;
  };
}



Q.30)Explain tail call optimization in JavaScript.
ans : tail call optimization is a technique in which the functions are placed at the end
      this will helps in optimization

Objects & Prototypes (31–45)
Q.31)How does the prototype chain work in JavaScript inheritance?
ans : All the methods in javasctipt uses prototype inheritance
      like if you want array method map() then use Array.prototype.map();
      there is also a __proto__ chain.

Q.32)What are descriptors in JavaScript objects?
ans : Object property descriptors define property characteristics like:

writable

enumerable

configurable

value, get, set

Q.33)How can you prevent extensions to an object?
ans : use Object.freeze() or Object.seal() both prevents to extend.

Q.34)What is the difference between Object.freeze() and Object.seal()?
ans : Object.freeze() : prevents the top level properties of the object to modify
                        and also unable to add new properties
     Object.seal() :  Not prevents the modification but prevents the addition to the object

Q.35)Explain how to create a custom iterable object.
ans :let obj = {
  data: [1, 2, 3],
  [Symbol.iterator]() {
    let i = 0;
    return {
      next: () => ({
        done: i >= this.data.length,
        value: this.data[i++]
      })
    };
  }
};
      

Q.36)What are getters and setters in JavaScript objects?
ans : getters are the methods which are used to get any property within the object
      setters are the methods which are used to set the values to the keys of the object

Q.extra)  Explore all the methods of object ?


Q.37)How do you define a property with specific characteristics like writable, enumerable?
ans : use the methods obj.defineProperty(name,{
      writable : true,
      value : "anmol",
      enumerable : true
});
Object.defineProperty(obj, 'prop', {
  value: 10,
  writable: false,
  enumerable: true
});


Q.38)How does Object.create() work and why use it?
ans : Object.create() is used to create a new object
      

Q.39)What is the difference between shallow and deep copy of objects?
ans : shallow copy means the high level is copy by value and nested levels are copy by reference.
      deep copy means the complete object is copied to the new object.

Q.40)How can you check if an object is frozen or sealed?
ans : use Object.isFrozen(obj) and Object.isSealed(obj);

Q.41)Explain the difference between for...in and for...of?
ans : for...in loop is used to iterate over all the iterables
      for...of loop is use to iterate over array values

Q.42)How can you add methods to all instances of a particular object type?
MyConstructor.prototype.sayHello = function() {};
ans : MyConstructor.prototype.sayHello = function() {};

Q.43)How do you differentiate between own properties and inherited properties?  no understand
obj.hasOwnProperty('prop');

Object.assign(Target.prototype, Mixin);

Q.44)What are mixins and how are they used in JavaScript?    not understand
ans : Mixins are reusable object behaviors. You copy methods into a class.
    Object.assign(target, source1, source2);

Q.45)How does the ES6 class syntax relate to prototypes?
ans : Basically javascript accepts the prototype model
      but in ES6 class syntax is introduced for oops familier programmers
      just like classes are extended, prototypes are also used like a chain
      classes are methods like prototypes are methods
      javascript dont have interfaces

      ES6 classes are syntactic sugar over prototype-based inheritance.
Class methods are still stored on the prototype.

Asynchronous Programming & Advanced Concepts (46–50)
Q.46)How do promises differ from callbacks in error handling?
ans : in promises the error handling is executed using .catch()
     whereas in callbacks the errors are handled using custom if else blocks

Q.47)What is the event loop’s role in non-blocking I/O?
ans : event loop's have all the responsibilities to execute the asynchronous code out of the main thread
      running in callstack
      When any I/O comes the v8 sends it to the events loop and event loop send it to the libuv
      which complete it in the background and then give the callback to the micro or macro task queue
      where they are stays till the callstack is empty when the callstack is empty event loop
      moves first micro task queue callback and then macro task queue callback to the callstack

Q.48)What are async iterators and how do you use them?
ans : Async iterators allow you to iterate over asynchronous data sources (e.g., streams, paginated APIs) using for await...of.
Instead of returning values immediately, async iterators return promises that resolve to the next item.

     async function* generateAsync() {
  yield await Promise.resolve(1);
  yield await Promise.resolve(2);
}

(async () => {
  for await (let value of generateAsync()) {
    console.log(value); // logs 1 then 2
  }
})();


Q.49)What are microtasks and macrotasks in the JavaScript event loop?
ans : microtask queuue holds the callbacks of promises
      macrotask queue holds the callbacks of timers, fs modules etc

Q.50)How can you implement retry logic with promises?
ans : use the retry count and implement the custom logic for this
   function retry(fn, retries = 3, delay = 1000) {
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    const attempt = (n) => {
      fn()
        .then(resolve)
        .catch((err) => {
          if (n > 0) {
            setTimeout(() => attempt(n - 1), delay);
          } else {
            reject(err);
          }
        });
    };
    attempt(retries);
  });
}

// Example usage:
retry(() => fetch('https://api.example.com'), 3)
  .then(console.log)
  .catch(console.error);


    