### Node.js 100 Questions Test

#### Basics (1-10)

1. What is Node.js?
ans : Node.js is a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome’s V8 engine that lets you run JavaScript outside the browser.
2. Is Node.js single-threaded or multi-threaded?
ans : Node.js is single-threaded in design, but uses a multi-threaded libuv thread pool under the hood.
3. What is the difference between `require` and `import` in Node.js?
ans : In common js module we use require() to import any variable of functions  it is synchronous by nature.
      In ES module js we use import to import any variable or functions it is asynchronous by nature.
4. What is the use of the `package.json` file?
ans : Mention also that it includes metadata (scripts, entry point, version, etc.)
5. How do you create a simple HTTP server in Node.js?
ans : to create a simple http server we first import http from http.
      and use createServer() method.
      http.createServer((req, res) => {}).listen(3000)
6. What are global objects in Node.js? Name a few?
ans : Use global, process, __dirname, etc.
7. How do you export a module in Node.js?
ans : module.exports for CommonJS and export / export default for ES modules.
8. What is `npm` and what is it used for?
ans : npm is a package manager which is used for installing and updating any package inside the node application.
9. How can you read environment variables in Node.js?
ans : we process.env.VARIABLE_NAME.
10. What is the role of the `process` object?
ans : The role of the process object is to accessible all the important data in the complete application.

#### Modules and File System (11-20)

11. What is the difference between built-in and user-defined modules?
ans : built in modules are the modules which are ready to use without installing or defined by the developer
      user-defined modules are the modules which are defined by the developer.
      built-in (like fs, path), user-defined (your own JS files).
12. How do you read a file asynchronously using `fs` module?
ans : we fs.readFile('filepath', (err,data)=>{
    if(err) return console.log(err);
      console.log(data);
})
13. How do you write to a file in Node.js?
ans : use the fs module fs.writeFile().  
      fs.writeFile(path, data, callback);

14. What are streams in Node.js?
ans : streams are the chunks of data which helps to prevent the buffering of complete data to the server memory
      we have 4 types of streams
       1) readable streams
       2) writable streams
       3) duplex streams
       4) transformed streams
15. Explain the difference between `fs.readFile` and `fs.createReadStream`?
ans : fs.readFile is a simple buffering to read the full file into memory.
      fs.createReadStream is a helps to read the file in streams of data.(better for large data).
16. What is the purpose of `path` module?
ans : path helps work with file paths across platforms (join, resolve, etc.).
17. How do you delete a file in Node.js?
ans : to delete a file we use fs.unlink() or fs.rm()
18. What is the difference between `__dirname` and `__filename`?
ans : __dirname used to access the current directory name and __filename is used to access the current __filename
19. How can you watch for file changes in Node.js?
ans : node --watch and nodemon for development.
20. How can you check if a file exists?
ans : fs.existsSync() or fs.access().

#### Event Loop and Asynchronous Programming (21-30)

21. What is the event loop in Node.js?
ans : event loop is responsible for all the async tasks ofloads by the v8 engine
     event loop has microtask and macrotask queues which are helps to holds the callbacks
     and whenever the callstack is empty event loop moves these callbacks to the callstack for execution
     in priority.
22. How does the event loop handle blocking code?
ans : event loop offloads the blocking tasks to the libuv thread pools
      executes them parallely in background and offloads the callback to the callback queues of event loop
      and event loop moves these to the callstack.
23. What is a callback function?
ans : callback functions are the functions which are passed as a arguments to another functions for later execution.
24. What are Promises in Node.js?
ans : Promises are the objects which returns resolved and rejects in future
      promises have three states pending, fullfilled, rejected.
25. Explain `async/await` syntax with an example?
ans : async/await is a just a syntactic sugar over promises
       async function response(){
           try{
              let res = await api();
              console.log(res);
           }catch(err){
               console.log(err);
           }
       }
       response();

       In this async functions always returns the promise if you wait for an response then you should use await in front of that statement.
26. What is the difference between `setImmediate()` and `setTimeout()`?
ans : setImmediate() is executed in check phase of event loop
      setTimeout() is executed after the given time delay
27. What is the use of `process.nextTick()`?
ans : process.nextTick() is used to execute any task before the next iteration of the event loop.
It's added to microtask queue, executes before other I/O.

28. What is the order of execution: `setImmediate`, `setTimeout`, and `process.nextTick`?
ans : process.nextTick(),
 setImmediate(), setTimeout() depending on the environment.
29. How can you handle async errors?
ans :  Use try/catch with async/await, or .catch() with promises.
30. What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous methods?
ans : synchronous methods runs directly
    asynchronous methods runs in parallel.
    sync blocks thread, async doesn't.

#### Express.js (31-45)

31. What is Express.js?
ans : Express js is a framework of nodejs which is used to create highly avaible and scalable servers.
32. How do you create an Express server?
ans : to create a express server 
      const app = express(); 
      app.listen(3000)
33. How do you handle GET and POST requests in Express?
ans : app.get('/path', handler) and app.post('/path', handler)
34. What is middleware in Express?
ans : middlewares are the lauer between the requests and the controllers using which 
      we can also implement our custom logic like authenticate and authorize the user.
35. How do you serve static files in Express?
ans : To serve static files we have express.static() middleware.
36. What is the purpose of `next()` function in Express middleware?
ans : use next() to give responsibility to next middleware in queue.
37. How do you define route parameters in Express?
ans : to define route parameters we use express router() ans .use() method
      example: /user/:id in routes
38. How do you handle 404 errors in Express?
ans :  Should mention using a * route or 404
       app.use((req, res) => res.status(404).send())
39. How do you handle errors centrally in Express?
ans : app.use((err, req, res, next) => {...})
40. How do you use a router in Express?
ans : import router from express and use them with the method .use
example: app.use('/api', router)
41. What is the difference between `app.use()` and `app.get()`?
ans : app.use() can handle all types of requests
      but app.get() handles only get requests matched with the path.
42. How do you configure CORS in Express?
ans : to configure cors first import it from express
       Use: const cors = require('cors');
        app.use(cors());
43. How do you limit the request body size in Express?
ans : pp.use(express.json({ limit: '10kb' }))
44. What is `express.json()` middleware used for?
ans : express.json() is used to convert the different types of data to json.
45. How do you enable HTTPS in an Express server?
ans : first create TLS certificate on the server
      and import HTTPS over http from express
      and match the TLS for every request.

      https.createServer({ key, cert }, app).listen(...)

#### Databases (46-60)

46. How do you connect to MongoDB using Mongoose?
ans : const mongoose = require('mongoose');
mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost:27017/dbname')
  .then(() => console.log('Connected'))
  .catch(err => console.error(err));

      
47. What is the difference between `find()`, `findOne()`, and `findById()` in Mongoose?
ans : find() returns you all the data of that collection as an array
      findOne() receive a filter and returns first matched doc.
      findById() receive a _id and returns a single record.
48. What are Mongoose schemas?
ans : It is a predefined structure of the records you can also validate the data using shcemas.
49. How do you define a model in Mongoose?
ans : you can import mongoose
    const userSchema = new Monoose.Schema({
         name : {
            type: string,
            required : true
         },
         email :{
            type : String,
            required : true
         },
         password : {
            type : String,
            required : true
         }
    },timeStamps : true);
   
   const User = mongoose.model(userSchema);
   exports.module = User;

50. What is the use of indexes in MongoDB?
ans : We can use indexes for faster the data retrieval.
      they can be single-field or compound, and you can use .explain() to check index use.
51. How do you connect Node.js with MySQL?
ans : We can use the MySQL orm sequelize.
     const { Sequelize } = require('sequelize');
const sequelize = new Sequelize('db', 'user', 'pass', { dialect: 'mysql' });

52. How do you prevent SQL injection in Node.js?
ans : 1) must use the parameterized query.
53. What are transactions and how do you use them in MongoDB with Node.js?
ans : transactions are the combination of multiple operations in which the transaction return seccess only if all the operations are successfully executed else all the operations are rolledback to previous state.
54. How do you perform validations in Mongoose?
ans : for eg: if you need to insert a field must be exist in every record use required : true.
      for unique value use unique : true
      for enum use enum
55. What is population in Mongoose?
ans : To populate the aggregated values from multiple collections 
     use .populate()
56. What are virtuals in Mongoose?
ans : Virtuals are computed fields that don’t persist in the DB.
    userSchema.virtual('fullName').get(function () {
  return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
});

57. How do you handle connection errors in Mongoose?
ans : Should mention using .catch() or listening to events:
    mongoose.connection.on('error', err => console.error('Connection error:', err));

58. How do you define relationships in Mongoose?
ans : use the ref : 'collection name'
59. What is aggregation in MongoDB?
ans : when you try to fetch data from multiple collections or try any calculation you need to se aggregation for complex queries.
60. How do you use the `aggregate()` method in Mongoose?
ans : aggregate() method is used to implement aggregation in mongodb.

#### Testing and Debugging (61-70)

61. What is unit testing?
ans : Unit testing refers to the testing of a single unit or functions.
62. How do you perform unit testing in Node.js?
ans : use the framework like jest,mocha.
63. What is Mocha and Chai?
ans : Mocha is a JavaScript test framework for Node.js that runs on the command line.
Chai is an assertion library used with Mocha that allows BDD/TDD style assertions (expect, should, assert).

64. How do you write an integration test for an API in Node.js?
ans : integration test is a technique of testing the integration part like database connections
      third party apis.
      const request = require('supertest');
const app = require('../app'); // your Express app

describe('GET /users', () => {
  it('should return 200 and list of users', async () => {
    const res = await request(app).get('/users');
    expect(res.statusCode).toEqual(200);
    expect(res.body).toBeInstanceOf(Array);
  });
});

65. What is mocking and how is it useful in testing?
ans : Mocking means replacing real dependencies (e.g., DB, API) with fake versions during testing to control behavior and isolate units.
66. What is the difference between unit and integration testing?
ans : Unit testing just test the small part of out application
     integration testing testing the interaction between     components/modules 
67. What tools can you use to debug Node.js code?
ans : use the browser network tab
      use winston for logging
      use morgan for request logs
      use vs code debugger
      use consoles
      use monitoring tools
      node --inspect
68. How do you use `node inspect`?
ans : Run node inspect index.js to start in debug mode. You can also add breakpoints using debugger in the code.
Then, use commands like cont, next, repl.
69. What is `console.trace()` used for?
ans : console.trace() prints the current stack trace to help trace the code path leading to that point—useful for debugging unexpected calls.
70. How do you handle errors in production?
ans : use try catch and .catch()
     Use global error handlers (Express error middleware)

Log errors using winston, bunyan, or cloud logging tools

Send proper HTTP response (don’t leak sensitive info)

Use process.on('uncaughtException') and process.on('unhandledRejection') (with care)

#### Security and Performance (71-80)

71. How do you prevent XSS in Node.js?
ans : Escape or sanitize user inputs using libraries like xss-clean, use helmet, and encode output data to prevent script injection in HTML.
72. How do you prevent SQL injection in Node.js?
ans : use the parameterized queries,
      ORM libraries like Sequelize.
73. What is rate limiting and how do you implement it?
ans : rate limiting is process of prevent the unnecessary spam on the server,
      use the express middleware to implement this inside the server.
74. What is helmet.js used for?
ans : helmet.js is used for the security purpose,
      Helmet helps secure Express apps by setting various HTTP headers like X-Content-Type-Options, Strict-Transport-Security, X-Frame-Options, etc.
75. How do you encrypt passwords in Node.js?
ans : for password we use the bcrypt library and use bcrypt.hash() to encrypt the password
      and bcrypt.compare() to match it
76. What is the purpose of `dotenv` package?
ans : dotenv package is used to access the stored data inside the .env file like keys, urls
77. How do you secure sensitive data in Node.js?
ans : use .env file
      Never commit .env to version control
      Use secret management tools
      Use encryption for sensitive fields in DB
78. What is load balancing and how is it done in Node.js?
ans : load balancing is a technique using which we redirect the requests to the correct server
      load balancers reduce the traffic on single server by using different algorithms
      like nginx.
79. How do you optimize performance of a Node.js app?
ans : For optimization :
     1) use the authentication and authorization on the middleware end to stop the unauthorized traffic.
     2) use the clusters to create multiple worker threads to scale the application horizontally
     3) use child processes to offloads the heavy calculations on the seperate threads.
     4) use the pagination.
     5) use the indexing.
     6) use the seperate replica set for reading and inserting
     7) implement the rate limiting.
     8) Use caching (e.g., Redis).
80. How do you prevent memory leaks in Node.js?
ans : To prevent memory leaks :
    1) use closures correctly
    2) must remove the event listeners
    3) must clear the timers
    4) use WeakSet and WeakMap beause they are weakly referenced inside the memory
    5) must reduce the declaration of unnecessary global variables

#### Deployment and DevOps (81-90)

81. How do you deploy a Node.js app to production?
ans : 1) using the PM2 for making the fault tolerant
      2)  deploy it on vercel/netlify for frontend, railway,heroku for backend and atlas for mongodb
      3) use the continous integration for making build, running test script and
         continous delivery for deployement.
      4) use workflows for this
      5) use docker images to reduce the size of the application
      6) use the kubernetes pods for creating the multiple instances to make it more highly scalable and available.

82. What is PM2 and how is it used?
ans : PM2 is a process manager used in multiple framewors and it is also used for express servers to 
     automatically up the server when they are crashed.
83. How do you set environment variables in production?
ans : to set environment use some cloud storage like ETCD.
     Use .env files (with dotenv), set variables in cloud dashboards (e.g., Heroku, Railway), or export them directly:

    export NODE_ENV=production
    Kubernetes: use ConfigMaps and Secrets

Docker: pass --env or use .env + Dockerfile
      
84. What is CI/CD and how is it implemented in Node.js?
ans : CI/CD is known as continous integration and continous deployement/delivery
      implemented using the workflow files for running the scripts
      at every push.
      CI (Continuous Integration): run tests, lint, build on every push
      CD (Continuous Delivery/Deployment): deploy to staging/prod after CI
      Use GitHub Actions, CircleCI, Jenkins, GitLab CI

85. How do you monitor a Node.js application?
ans : For monitoring :
      1) use winston for logging
      2) use prometheus for creating dashboards and for logging use loki.

86. How do you scale a Node.js application?
ans :  For scalability :
      1) use clusters nodes of a single application
      2) use the child processes
      3) use the load balancers for reverse proxies
      4) use multiple database replica sets.
      5) Clustering (PM2 cluster mode)
      6) Microservices architecture
      7) Caching with Redis
      8) CDNs for static files

87. What is Docker and how do you use it with Node.js?
ans : Docker is a containerization tools using which we create an compressed image of our application which we can run on any machine.
      We should crate a Dockerfile inside the node server and create all the necessary commands.
88. How do you deploy Node.js apps on AWS?
ans : 1) By using docker and pull the image of EC2 instance
      2) Use EC2 with PM2 and Nginx
      3) Use Lambda (for serverless apps)
89. How do you perform zero-downtime deployments?
ans : for zero downtime deployements we use :
      1) Blue-Green Deployment: Switch traffic between two identical environments
      2) Canary deployement : Deploy to the percentage of users.
      3) Rolling Deployment: Replace instances one by one
      4) Use tools like Kubernetes, NGINX, or AWS CodeDeploy

90. What is reverse proxy and why is it used?
ans : reverse proxy is process of offloading the traffic to multiple instances.
       it is used for load balancing for eg :tootls like nginx.
       SSL termination
       Caching/static file serving

#### Advanced Topics (91-100)

91. What is clustering in Node.js?
ans : Clustering is a technique using which we can create multiple instances of a single application
      equals to the core of machine, which helps to horizontally scale the application and optimize the performance
92. How do you implement caching in Node.js?
ans : to implement caching we need to install ioRedis
      and create the connection for it
      when we requests for the high frequency data then server first check inside the redis if not present then 
      call to the main database
      we must implement the TTL and cache invalidation for real time visibility
93. What is a worker thread in Node.js?
ans : Worker Threads in Node.js allow running JavaScript code in parallel on multiple threads. Unlike child processes, worker threads share memory with the parent thread and are used for CPU-intensive tasks.

Introduced in Node.js v10.5+

Use the worker_threads module.

Useful for heavy computations without blocking the event loop.

94. What are child processes and how are they used?
ans : child processes are the seperate processes used to handle the heavy calculations seperated from the main thread to prevent the main thread block.
95. How do you send emails from Node.js?
ans : To send emails we must create a seperate service for just sending the emails because they are the less priority tasks and can be executed after some delay
      To implement this use the message stream kafka for not lossing any data.

96. How do you consume a REST API in Node.js?
ans : To consume a REST API in Node.js, use:
axios
node-fetch
Native https module

97. What is gRPC and how is it used in Node.js?
ans : grpc is known as google remote procedure call it is used in the streaming applications because 
      it transfers data in the form of a binary
      and it is using the protobuf.
      using the procedures(functions) to communicate
      It is very fast that's why used in streaming websites

      gRPC (Google Remote Procedure Call) is a high-performance, language-agnostic RPC framework that uses Protocol Buffers (protobuf) for data serialization and HTTP/2 for communication.
      Use @grpc/grpc-js and @grpc/proto-loader.
      Define services and message types in .proto files.
      It’s used in microservices, real-time systems, and where performance is critical.
      
98. What is the difference between CommonJS and ES Modules?
ans : commonjs is synchronous in nature
      used exports.module and require()
      ES modules are asynchronous in nature
      used imports and named export, default export
99. How do you handle file uploads in Node.js?
ans : To upload file in node we use multer and for storage use S3
100. What are WebSockets and how do you use them in Node.js?
ans : WebSockets are the technique of creating a fully duplex two communication channel over a single TCP protocol.
      To create a socket connection first the client sends a request with the header connection -type upgrade
      the server checks that the sockets are implemented or not if present then 
      give response back to the client with the header connection-type upgrade
      and a persistent connection is created.
