**100 Unique Node.js Interview Questions (DevOps-Reduced Version)**

---

### Basics & Core Concepts

1. What is Node.js and how does it differ from traditional web servers?
ans :  It’s a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome's V8 engine.. It is differ from traditional web servers because it it only utilising a sigle thread of the operating system.
2. What are the key features of Node.js?
ans : 1) Running on single thread
      2) Non-Blocking I/O
      3) Event driven architecture
      4) Event loop can handle concurrent requests
      5) Clustering

3. Explain the event-driven architecture of Node.js.
ans : event - driven architecture refers to the event emitter which is used to emit the event using .emit
     listen the event using .on.
4. What is the role of the V8 engine in Node.js?
ans : V8 helps the Nodejs to run outside of the browser. It has callstack it manages the garbage collector.
5. What is the purpose of the `package.json` file?
ans : It holds the meta data like versions, dependencies,dev dependencies.
6. How does the Node.js event loop work?
ans : event loop has all the responsibility to execute asynchronous task parallely.
      event loop has call queues named as microtask queue which holds the callbacks of promises
      macrotask queue which holds the callbacks of timers,fs modules whenever the callstack is empty event loop moves the task to callstack for execution.
7. What is the difference between `process.nextTick()` and `setImmediate()`?
ans : process.nextTick() executes before the next event loop iterations.
      setImmediate() executes in check phase
8. What are the different types of streams in Node.js?
ans : We have Readable streams
      Writable streams
      transformed streams
      duplex streams
9. What is the difference between `Buffer` and `Stream`?
ans : Buffer are the data which are first downloaded in the server memory to execution.
      Stream are the chunks of data which are not downloaed completely on the server memory, stream are useful for large data sets
10. How can you handle exceptions in Node.js?
ans : to handle execeptions we have try catch block, we have .catch() method in promises

### Modules & NPM

11. What is the difference between CommonJS and ES Modules?
ans : Common js is a sync technique used as exports.module and .require() to import/export.
      ES modules are async technique used as named exports, default exports and import
12. How do you create a custom module in Node.js?
ans : You create a custom module by writing reusable functions or variables in a separate .js file and exporting them using module.exports
13. Explain the difference between `require()` and `import`.
ans : require() loads the module synchronously
      import loads the module in parallel.
14. What is the purpose of `npm link`?
ans : npm link is used to symlink a local package globally or to another local project. It's useful for developing libraries locally without publishing to the registry.
15. How do peer dependencies work in NPM?
ans : Peer dependencies specify that your package is compatible with a specific version of a dependency, but the host application must install it. They're used in libraries to avoid dependency duplication or conflicts.
16. What are `devDependencies` and when should they be used?
ans : devDependencies are used in devlopment environment like nodemon.
17. What is the use of `.npmrc` file?
ans : .npmrc is a config file for NPM where you can set custom configurations like registry URL, authentication tokens, proxy settings, etc., on a project or global level.
18. How do you manage environment variables in Node.js?
ans : use .env file with process.env.VARIABLE_NAME.
19. What is `npx` and how is it different from `npm`?
ans : we use 'npx' if we want to use any package without installing it locally.
      use npm to install and update any package.
20. How do you handle version conflicts in NPM?
ans :  To handle version conflicts:

Use npm dedupe to reduce duplication.

Use resolutions in package.json (with Yarn) to force a specific version.

Review dependency trees with npm ls.

Manually align versions and avoid conflicting packages.

### File System & Streams

21. How do you read and write files asynchronously?
ans : use the fs module functions readFile and writeFile.
22. Explain the difference between synchronous and asynchronous file operations.
ans : synchronous file operations are block the main thread till the operatiosn is not completed
      asynchronous operations not block the main thread they are executed parallely.
23. How do you create a readable and writable stream?
ans : to create readble streams use fs.createReadableStream() and fs.createWriteableStream();
24. How can you copy a file using streams?
ans : use fs.createReadStream().pipe(fs.createWriteStream())
25. How do you watch for file changes in Node.js?
ans : Use fs.watch() or fs.watchFile() to watch file changes in code:

### Express.js and Middleware

26. What is Express.js and why is it used?
ans : Expressjs is a nodejs framework used to create the servers.
27. How do you define routes in Express?
ans : use express router();
28. What is middleware in Express and how is it used?
ans : middleware is layer between the controllers and the client.
      middlewares are used to authentication and authorize the user,
      cache,rate limiting etc.
29. How do you handle errors in Express middleware?
ans : use try catch block or .catch()
(err, req, res, next)  special error handling middleware.
30. What are `req`, `res`, and `next` in Express?
ans : req holds the client side data
       res holds the data which is returned by the server
       next has the address of the next middleware.
31. How do you serve static files in Express?
ans : use express.static()
32. What is the difference between `app.use()` and `app.get()`?
ans : app.use() is a multi purpose method
      app.get() is a method for the get requests.
33. How do you structure a large Express application?
ans : use : 
        controllers
        models
        routes
        utils
        index.js
        services
        config
34. How can you implement authentication in Express?
ans : use jwt, sessions
35. How do you manage sessions in Express?
ans : to manage sessions save the sessions id with the ttl inside a mongodb.

### Asynchronous Programming

36. What are callbacks and how are they used?
ans : callbacks are the functions which are passed as a argument to another function for later execution.
37. What is callback hell and how do you avoid it?
ans : callback hell are the structure of multiple nexted callbacks.
You can avoid it by:
Using named functions
Using Promises
Using async/await

38. Explain Promises and how they work.
ans : Promises are the objects which are resolved and rejected in the future,
      promises have three states pending, fulfilled, rejected.
39. What is async/await and how does it improve code readability?
ans : async/await is just a simple syntax over the promises to reduce the complex promise chaining.
      which impoves the code readability.
40. What happens if an async function throws an error?
ans : we should handle it using try catch block and .catch();

### Testing & Debugging

41. What tools do you use for unit testing in Node.js?

ans : use jest,mocha,chai 
42. How do you mock dependencies in tests?
ans : use the mock data for every functions.

43. How do you perform integration testing in Node.js?
ans : use the superset to test the integrations part.

44. What is the difference between unit and integration tests?

ans : Unit tests are just testing the parts like functions.
      integration tests tests the integration part like database connection, third party apis.
45. How do you debug a Node.js application?
ans : use the logger winston
      use the browser devtool
      use the monitoring tools
      use the debugger of editor

### REST API Design

46. How do you design a RESTful API in Node.js?
ans : Express structure

     constrollers
     routes
     models
     utils
     middlewares
     index.js

47. What is the purpose of status codes in HTTP responses?
ans : status codes are help to evaluate that what of reponse is coming from the server to set the behaviour of the client accordingly.

48. How do you handle input validation in APIs?
ans: Sanitize and validate inputs in controllers or middlewares.
     use orm for input validation like mongoose

49. How do you implement pagination in a REST API?
ans : use the concept of database skip() and limit() to give the offset and limit the records

50. How do you implement rate limiting in an API?
ans : use the npm package for rate limiting
      use redis to implement limiting by just increase the count on the request of any user.

### Database Integration

51. How do you connect Node.js to MongoDB?
ans : use the mongoClient or use mongoose.connect();

52. How do you perform CRUD operations using Mongoose?
ans : use .save(), .updateOne(), .find(), .findOne(), .findById()

53. What are the benefits of using an ORM?
ans : they give you the model of the database looks like
       they handle the input and many other validations
       they makes the crud operations very easy
       they give security to the data.

54. How do you handle transactions in MongoDB or MySQL?
ans : to handle transactions in MongoDB use the mongoose session
      session.startTransaction(), session.abortTransaction(), session.commit()

      to handle transactions in mySQL Use Sequelize’s transaction API.

55. What is connection pooling?
ans : Connection pooling reuses a fixed number of DB connections for performance and scalability. Reduces overhead of frequent connect/disconnect cycles.

56. How do you prevent SQL injection?
ans : using the orms
      sanitizing the inputs
      pass the parametized queries.

57. How do you use Redis with Node.js?
ans : create a connection to the Redis server after install the ioRedis
      then cache the most frequent accessed and dont change frequently data inside the redis.
      because the data fetching from the redis server is very fast
      first check the data to the redis if not present then query to the main db.

58. How do you structure your code for database access?
ans :  use db/config.js file
      pass this connection to the index.js file for creating the instance.

59. How do you handle schema migrations?
ans : handle schema migrations my setting up the orms which takes care of all the migrations history.

60. What is the difference between Mongoose and native MongoDB driver?
ans : Mongoose is a orm gives more flexibility , security and makes the crud operations easy.
     MongoDb driver is a mongo client which is not much flexible and secure.

### Authentication & Authorization

61. How do you implement JWT authentication?  slow
ans : JWT authentication is implemented by using jsonwebtoken package
      first create a token using a secret logic implemeted on the middleware end at the time of login
      using methods jwt.sign(payload, secret) to create a token   token have  Hashkey + payload + secret
      Jwt is stateless because it holds all the user information in itself.

62. What is OAuth2 and how is it used in Node.js?
ans : OAuth2 is a authentication technique used for the google ,facebook and many other companies to redirect theri page where all the user information is saved and after the authentication the information and a token is returned by the google.
Use Passport.js strategies like passport-google-oauth20 to authenticate via external providers.

63. How do you store passwords securely?
ans : use the hashed password to save inside the database
      use bcrypt package of npm
      use bcrypt.hash(password, salt) to hash the password
      use bcrypt.compare(password, hashedPassword)  to match the password.

64. What are access and refresh tokens?
ans : access token is a token which is used to authenticate the user but this will expires after some time
      to regenerate this access token use the refersh token on the client side.

65. How do you protect routes in an Express app?
ans : use middlewares.
      Block unauthorized access and allow only authenticated users

### Caching & Performance

66. How does caching improve performance in a Node.js app?
ans : Reduces DB load
Speeds up response time
Minimizes latency for repeated requests

67. How do you use Redis for caching?
ans : first use ioRedis() and create connection to redis server
      when client request to the data first data is queried inside the redis if not present then query the main db.

68. What is the difference between in-memory and distributed cache?
ans : In-memory: Data is stored in the same app instance
     Distributed: Data is stored in centralized cache servers

69. How do you implement memoization?  slow
ans : memoization is a technique using which we can store the heavy calculations result as a cache and if 
     that same calculation is triggered then give the output from the cache.

70. What is a memory leak and how do you prevent it?
ans : memory leak is a problem in which the memory is not released of the unreachable variables and functions
      the garbage collector not mark these to release
      To avoid this :
        use the WeakSet and WeakMap because they are weakly referenced in the memory
        msut remove the listerners
        must clear the timers
        not declare unnecessary global variables
        use clusters carefully
        use IIFEs

### Error Handling & Logging

71. How do you log application errors?
ans : Use loggers like Winston or Pino
Log to console, file, or external services (e.g., Loggly, Sentry)
Include timestamps, log levels, and correlation IDs
      

72. What is the difference between operational and programmer errors?
ans :  operational errors are Expected issues like failed DB connection, invalid input
       programmer errors come from the programmers mistakes like syntax error, reference error, type errors.


28-05-2025
73. How do you implement a global error handler?
ans :  In Express.js, implement a global error handler using a middleware with 4 parameters:

app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  console.error(err.stack);
  res.status(err.statusCode || 500).json({ message: err.message });
});


74. How do you send logs to a centralized logging system?
ans : 
Use libraries like winston, bunyan, or pino to collect logs, and configure transports to services like Logstash, Fluentd, or a cloud solution like AWS CloudWatch, ELK stack, or Datadog

75. What tools do you use for logging in Node.js?
ans :  Expected tools:

winston

pino

bunyan

morgan (for HTTP request logging)
Elastic Search for logs database

### Event-Driven Programming

76. What is the EventEmitter class?
ans : EventEmitter class is used to handle the event driven architecture of nodejs
     it has the .emit , .on, .remove   methods to drive the applicaton on events.
77. How do you create a custom event in Node.js?
ans : to create a custom event in nodejs we have to use the eventEmitter.

78. What is the purpose of `once()` method?
ans : .once() is used to attach a listener that will be invoked only the first time the event is emitted, then automatically removed.

79. How do you remove an event listener?
ans : emitter.removeListener('eventName', listenerFn);

80. What is the advantage of event-driven design?
ans : This will helps to drive the applicaton on events send events, receive events , remove events whenever they are not required.

### Security

81. How do you prevent XSS in a Node.js app?
ans : XSS stands for cross site scripting it is a technique in which the data is hijacked by the hacker and inject the malwares inside it to prevent this must sanitize the inputs on client side as well as on server side
  must use orm to validate the inputs
  use Helmet

82. How do you prevent CSRF attacks?
ans : CSRF stands for cross site request forgery it is a common attack in which the data between the request and the response is hijacked by the attacker  to prevent this 
   use HTTPs over http
   use sanitization techniques
   use Helmet
   use authentication and authorization techniques
   use orms

83. How do you handle CORS in Express?
ans : CORS stands for cross origin resource sharing the default behaviour of browser is to stop the requests from the different origins to prevent this default behaviour we have implement the cors middleware of express
 and also we have the configs to give the accesses to the specific ips.
84. What is helmet.js and how does it help?
ans : helmet sets various HTTP headers to secure the app (e.g., Content-Security-Policy, X-Frame-Options, X-XSS-Protection).

85. What are some common Node.js security best practices?
ans : use HTTPS over http
      use helmet.js
      use orms
      use authentication and authorization techniques
      use rate limiter

### Deployment & Scalability (Reduced DevOps)

86. How do you use PM2 to manage Node processes?
ans : PM2 is a process manager using which we have to start multiple instances of an application
      PM2 give the high availability and fault tolerance
      When the application crashed pm2 autmatically restarts it.
87. What are the benefits of clustering in Node.js?
ans : clustering creates multiple instances of a same application on the same machine
      this will horizontaly scale the application
      

88. How do you use environment variables securely?
ans : store the variables in .env file and dont pushed it to the version controls
      use process.env.VARIABLE_NAME to access the variable globally.

89. What is load balancing and how does it affect Node.js apps?
ans : load balancing is a technique used by the reverse proxies to distribute the requests to the multiple servers

90. What is the role of reverse proxy servers like Nginx?
ans : Nginx used for many purposes like load balancing
       cache, authentication, hides the main servers to the client.

### Advanced Topics

91. What is the purpose of the `cluster` module?
ans : cluster module helps to create multiple instances of the same application.
92. How do you create a child process?
ans : first import the child process 
      child process are running seperated from the main threads they are used to run the command scripts or do some backgound task.
      const { exec } = require('child_process');
exec('ls -la', (err, stdout, stderr) => console.log(stdout));

93. What are worker threads and when should they be used?
ans : worker threads are the running in background seperated from the main thread they are used for the some heavy calculations because they are not block the main thread for calculation.

94. How does Node.js handle multithreading?
ans : Node js not supports multithreading it is running completely on single thread
     but for concurrency it has the event loop which holds all the callbacks and the libuv which has the thread loop
     which is helps to execute the tasks in the background and give result to the event loop.

95. What is backpressure in streams?
ans : Backpressure occurs when the writable stream cannot process data as fast as it is received from the readable stream. It’s handled via stream.pause(), stream.resume(), or checking write() return values.

96. How do you build a real-time app using WebSockets?
ans : first you can implement sockets on the frontend
      2) you can implement the sockets on the backend with using socket.io
      3) web sockets gives you the fully duplex two way communication channel and the connection is persistent
      4) whenever user sends the http request first time the server check that they have socket implemented 
       and also check the headers of the request connection-type : upgrade
      5) sends response back to the client with connection-type : upgarade and the persisten two way channel is created
      6) for broadcasting we have .broadcast methods
      7) for group we have .room method
      8) and we also sends the one o one messages.  

97. How do you handle file uploads in Node.js?
ans : use the multer package this will help to receive the multi/part files from the client
 and the cloud storage S3 for saving the files

98. How do you create a CLI tool in Node.js?
ans : Use the #!/usr/bin/env node shebang in your file, parse arguments with yargs or commander, and define your commands:
#!/usr/bin/env node
console.log("Hello CLI");


99. What is the purpose of async\_hooks module?   need more clarity
ans : async_hooks allows you to track asynchronous operations' lifecycle in Node.js, such as Promises, timers, and network requests — useful for debugging or context propagation in async environments.

100. How does garbage collection work in Node.js?
ans : js has the automatic garbage collection which is using the mark and sweep algorithm 
     first the gc marks the reachable variables and then release the memory of unmarked variables.
