**100 Unique Node.js Interview Questions (Set 3)**

Do it on 28/05/2025

**Core Node.js Concepts**

1. What is the purpose of the `Buffer` class in Node.js?
ans : Buffer is a data which is completely downloaded on the server memory before execution.it is not preferable for large data sets.

The Buffer class in Node.js is used to handle binary data directly in memory. It's commonly used when working with streams, file systems, and networking where raw data is needed. Buffers are especially useful for processing large amounts of binary data efficiently, without converting to strings.

2. How does Node.js handle child processes?
ans : child processes is a technique which is used to execute any script or command seperately from the main thead.

3. Explain the purpose of `global` object in Node.js?
ans : global objects are used to set any value globaly that is accessible anywhere inside the application .
   for eg: process, __dirname, filename

4. What is the role of the V8 engine in Node.js?
ans : V8 is a javascript enginer built by google for the chrome browser. It helps to execute the synchronous code and offloads the asynchronous code to event loop
      V8 enginer also responsible for automatic garbage collection.
      It also have the ignition interepreter and turbofan compiler.

5. How does the `require.cache` work?
ans : require.cache works to cache the imported module for later use without re importing it.

6. What is the difference between `process.nextTick()` and `setImmediate()`?
ans : process.nextTick() callbacks are executed before the next iteration of event loop.
      setImmediate() callbacks are executed after the poll pase in with the I/O callbacks are executed.

7. How do you expose functions from a Node.js module?
ans : to expose functions use exports.module for common js modules
       and use named exports and default exports for ES module.

8. What are the main differences between CommonJS and ES modules in Node.js?
ans : Common js modules are synchronously loaded
      ES modules are asynchronously loaded.

9. What is the event loop and how does it work?
ans : event loop has all the responsibility for the execution of the asynchronous tasks, event loop has two callback queues microtask queue(higher priority) and macrotask queue(lower priority) which holds the callbacks of the asynchronous tasks and whenever the callstack is empty which is running on the main thread gets empty event loop offloads the callbacks to the callstack for the execution.

10. What are streams in Node.js and what are their types?
ans : streams are the chunks of data which are not downloaded on the server memory at once.
  streams are used for the large data sets
   There are multiple types of streams:
    1) Readable streams
    2) Writable streams
    3) duplex streams
    4) transformed streams

**Asynchronous Programming**

11. Explain the difference between callbacks, promises, and async/await?
ans : callbacks are the functions which are passed as an argument to the another functions for late execution
      Whenever the promises and async/await are not introduced then callbacks are the only way to handle the asynchronous tasks.
      callbacks have the complexity whenever the multiple nested callbacks are implemented known as callback hell.
      
      Promises :
      promises are the objects which give the guarantee to return the resolved or rejected in the future.
      promises has mainly three states pending, fulfilled, rejected.
      To handle errors in promises use .catch() method
      But it also has a complexity known as promise chaining in whch multiple .then are used

      Async/await:
      To overcome this we use async/await syntax to make it more readable
      Async functions are always returned the promise
      they are very easy if you need to execute the promises in sequence
      use await to wait for the result of the asynchronous statement.
      if you not use await then it returns the pending promise
      To handle error is async await use try catch block

12. How can you convert a callback-based function into a Promise?
ans : lets we have an example to send email to the user,before that we needs the user and orders details
      
      function getUser(userId, callback){
        return setTimeout(()=>{
            callback(null, {id : userId, name : "anmol"})
        },1000)
      };

      function getOrders(user, callback){
        return setTimeout(()=>{
            callback(null, {orderId : 101, user : user.name})
        },1000)
      };

      function sendEmail(order, callback){
        return setTimeout(()=>{
            callback(null, `Email has been sent to user ${order.user} for order ${order.orderId}`)
        },1000)
      }


      getUser(1, (err,user)=>{
             if(err) return console.log(err);
             getOrders(user, (err, order)=>{
                 if(err) return console.log(err);
                 sendEmail(order, (err, result)=>{
                    if(err) return console.log(err);
                     console.log(result);
                 })
             })
      });


      promise


      function getUser(userId){
         return new Promise((res,rej)=>{
             setTimeout(()=>{
                 res({id: userId, name: "anmol"})
             },1000)
         })
      };

      
      function getOrders(user){
         return new Promise((res,rej)=>{
             setTimeout(()=>{
                 res({orderId: 101, user: user.name})
             },1000)
         })
      };
      
      function getUser(order){
         return new Promise((res,rej)=>{
             setTimeout(()=>{
                 res(`Email has been sent to user ${order.user} for order ${order.orderId}`)
             },1000)
         })
      };


      getUser(1)
          .then(user => getOrders(user))
          .then(order => sendEmail(user))
          .then(result => console.log(result))
          .catch(err => console.log(err));



          async await

       async function call(){
            try{
               let user = await getUser(1);
               let order = await getOrders(user);
               let result = await sendEmail(order);
               console.log(result);
            }catch(err){
                console.log(err);
            }
       }



13. What is a race condition? How can it be avoided?
ans : If two or more operations try to modify shared state simultaneously, it can lead to unpredictable results.
Avoid with locks, mutexes, or atomic operations

14. Explain how `Promise.allSettled()` differs from `Promise.all()`?
ans : Promise.allSettled() used to execute the promises parallely it will returns the result after all the promises are settled returns result as an array
     [
        {status : "fulfilled", value : ""},
        {status : "rejected", reason : ""}
     ]


     Promise.all() executes the promises parallely returns the resolved if all the promises are resolved else returns rejected promise and short circuit.

15. How do you handle multiple asynchronous operations sequentially?
ans : to handle multiple operations sequentially use the async await syntax.

16. What is backpressure in streams?
ans : Whenever a situation arises in which the readable streams reads the data faster as compare to writable streams and writable streams unable to process
      then we use the backpressure to resolved this using stream.pause or stream.resume.

17. How does the `async_hooks` module work?
ans : async_hooks gives the functionality of implementing the asynchrnous approaches like callbacks, promises, async/await.
18. What are the risks of using synchronous code in an async system?
ans : synchrnous code blocks the execution of the main thread this will slow down the application.
19. Explain how `Promise.race()` works and give a use-case.
ans : Promise.race() is used to execute the promises parallely, it will returned the first settled promise no matter if resolved or reject.
      use -case 
       Whenever we want to implement the timeout on the execution of the promise
        use like const result = Promise.race([promise, timeoutPromise]);

20. What is the difference between microtasks and macrotasks?
ans : microtasks queue has the higher priority as compare to macrotask queue
      it holds the callbacks of the promises
      Macrotask queue has the lower priority
      it holds the callbacks of the timers, fs modules.etc

**Express.js and HTTP**

21. What is middleware in Express.js?
ans : middleware are the core part by which express is famous in market for server creations
      middleware the functions which are placed between the request and response
      express has many built in middlewares like express.cors, express.json() etc
      middlewares are also used to authenticate and authorize the user. eg, jwt
      middlewares are also used cache the data and also protect the routes.

22. How do you handle errors in Express.js?
ans : express has a special type of middleware (err,res,rej,next) 4 parameters
      you can also use .catch() for promises
      try catch for async await

23. Explain the difference between `req.params`, `req.query`, and `req.body`?
ans : req.params are the paramerters which are send insie the path of the request
       req.query are the parameters which are passed afer the ?  for eg: for pagination.
       req.body are used to get the body data from the request.

24. How do you serve static files in Express.js?
ans : use the express.static(filename);

25. What is the use of the `next` function in middleware?
ans : we use next function to go the the next middleware for execution.

26. How can you create a RESTful API using Express?
ans : first setup and http server
      create controllers
             routes
             models
             utils
             index.js
             middleware
             services

27. What is the best way to structure a large Express.js app?
ans : controllers
             routes
             models
             utils
             index.js
             middleware
             services

28. How do you implement rate limiting in an Express app?
ans : use express-rate-limiter or implement the redis counter.

29. How can you log requests and responses in Express?
ans : use winston or elasic search

30. How do you validate user input in Express routes?
ans : use orm for schema validation
      use parameterize query 

**APIs and Web Services**

31. How do you consume external APIs in Node.js?
ans : use the supertest to test integration part
      use the axios to consume the external apis
      and gives the cors permissions

32. What are the benefits of GraphQL over REST in Node.js?
ans : Graphql is a graphical query language which is used to prevent the over fetching and under fetching of data 
      the client has to decides what data need to fetch.
      but it is complext to setup

33. How would you implement pagination in a REST API?
ans :  get the parameters from the request
       use skip() and limit() for mongodb
       use offset and limit for mySQL

34. How do you handle versioning in APIs?
ans : use the versioning on the routes path.

35. How do you protect an API from abuse?
ans : use the rate limit
      use the helmet to share the protected headers
      use authenication and authorization techniques
      use orms for schema validations

36. How do you implement file uploads in an API?
ans : use multer to process the multi/part data and save this data to s3 cloud storage.

37. What is the role of CORS and how do you enable it?
ans : by default the browser restrict the traffic from the different origins to prevent this default dehaviour use cors middlwares.

38. How do you stream data over HTTP in Node.js?
ans : use the duplex stream model which pipe the readable streams with writable streams to consume the data of http.

39. How do you create a WebSocket server in Node.js?
ans : use socket.to to create a fully duplex and two way communication channel.

40. What is API throttling and how is it implemented?
ans : api throttling is a technique used to restrict the triggering of api till the timeout this will prevent the api from the abuse or spam.

**Database Integration**

41. How do you connect to MongoDB from Node.js?
ans : use a native mongo driveer mongoClient.connect()
      use a mongoose .connect() which is more flexible and better error handling.

42. What is the difference between Mongoose and the native MongoDB driver?
ans : mongoose is more flexibale and schema validation and makes easy the crud operations.
      mongo native client is not very flexiable and not give the schema validation.

43. How do you handle connection pooling in Node.js?
ans : whenever create the connection use the pool to connect to the multiple connections and use them parallely execution.

44. How do you perform transactions in MongoDB with Node.js?
ans : use mongoose session.startTransactions, session.commit(), session.abortTransactions().

45. How would you implement schema validation in Mongoose?
ans : use required, enum, default,etc for schema validation.

46. How can you prevent SQL injection in Node.js apps?
ans : use the parameterized queries
      use orms
      sanitize the inputs and validates them

47. What are some strategies for handling large result sets from a database?
ans : use pagination approach with skip() and limit() to get small sets of data.

48. How do you implement caching with Redis in Node.js?
ans : first connect to the Redis server using ioRedis package
      first check the data inside the redis server if not present makes an expensive query to the main db.
      this will reduce the latency
      speed up the response time

49. How do you handle database errors gracefully?
ans : use orm like mongoose for handling the errors
      use the express middleware (err,res,rej,next) to customize a central error logic.

50. What is a migration and how is it handled in SQL-based Node.js apps?
ans : migration is a technique which holds all the datbases changes history
      and it makes easy to migrate up and down whenever you required
      it make the development easy in teams.
      migration are used in SQL with sequelize orm.

**Authentication & Authorization**

51. How do you implement JWT authentication in Node.js?
ans : use the jsonwebtoken
      use the jwt.sign(payload,secret_key) to generate the jwt
      use the jwt.verify(payload,secret_key) to verify the jwt

52. What is OAuth2 and how can it be used in Node.js?
ans : OAuth2 using the external platfoms to authenticate like google , facebook
      uses passport.js in node.js

53. How do you implement role-based access control in an Express app?
ans : use the authorization custom logic on middleware to validate the roles and protect the routes.

54. What are secure practices for storing user passwords?
ans : use the hashed password
      salt the password between 11-12 rounds
      dont expose the password to the client at any cost

55. How do you handle session management in Node.js?
ans : manage the session using express session to manage the login of the user etc.

56. How would you invalidate a JWT token?
ans : use the expire flag at the time of jwt.sign.
Others include blacklisting on DB/cache

57. How do you prevent CSRF in a Node.js app?
ans : To prevent cross site request forgery should implement the 

      use CSRF tokens (csurf middleware), SameSite cookies, and avoid cookie-based auth.

58. How do you secure cookies in a web application?
ans : must give the expiration time to the cookies
      must sends the cookies with the HTTPS over http 

59. How do you implement social logins in Node.js?
ans : use passport with strategies (e.g., Google, Facebook), set up OAuth callback.

60. How do you prevent brute force login attempts?
ans : Should include rate-limiting middleware like express-rate-limit, lockouts after failed attempts, captcha.

**Security and Best Practices**

61. How do you prevent XSS attacks in Node.js?
ans : XSS stands for cross site scripting it is an attack by which the request or response is hijacked by the attackers
      to prevent this 
       use https over http
       use helmet for security headers
       use input sanitization and validation 
       use orms
       use parameterized queries.

62. What is Helmet and how does it help in securing your app?
ans : helmet is a package used to send the security headers to the request, 

63. How do you manage environment-specific configurations?
ans : use .env file inwhich use the environment - specific objects.

64. What are some best practices for handling sensitive data in Node.js?
ans : use authentication and authorization
     use bcrypt to hash the sensitive data
     use preventions for XSS and CSRF and sql injections attacks
     use https over http

65. How do you prevent NoSQL injection?
ans : use the parameterized queries
      use the orms for schema validation
      use input sanitization and validaton techniques
      use https over http

66. How do you ensure secure communication in Node.js apps?
ans : use https over http
      use cors
      use websockets for persistent connection.

67. What is rate limiting and how does it help in security?
ans : rate limiting is a technique used to avoid the abuse on the apis
      it prevent the abuse traffic and also give the security.

68. How do you keep third-party dependencies secure?
ans : use npm audit, snyk, update dependencies, lock versions.

69. What tools do you use to audit security issues?
ans : use browser dev tool
      Tools: snyk, npm audit, nsp, OWASP Dependency-Check.

70. How do you secure API keys in a Node.js project?
ans : place these inside the .env file on server but dont push to the version control.

**Testing and Debugging**

71. What are the differences between unit, integration, and E2E tests?
ans : unit is a testing of a small part or function independently
      integration is a testing of the integration part like db connections , third party apis tool used is supertest

72. How do you test Express routes?
ans : Use supertest + test framework (jest, mocha) to make HTTP calls to routes.

73. What is mocking and how do you use it in tests?
ans : mocking is technique in which we give the predefined data to return from a function.
it will help to assume the data and set the assertions accordingly.

74. What testing frameworks are commonly used with Node.js?
ans : jest for full testing framework
      mocha for creating a html templates for execution summary of test cases
      chai for assertions
      supertest for integration testing

75. How do you measure test coverage?
ans : Use tools like jest --coverage, nyc, or istanbul

76. How do you debug a Node.js application?
ans : use logger tool winston
      use monitoring tool
      use browser dev tool
      use elastic search for logging

77. How do you write tests for asynchronous code?
ans : use the async await inside the tests.

78. What is the role of `supertest` in API testing?
ans : supertest is used for integration testing.

79. How do you test middleware functions?
ans : using the unit test case with predefined return result.

80. How do you simulate database failures in tests?
ans : Simulate failures by mocking DB methods (jest.fn().mockRejectedValue(...)).

**Performance and Optimization**

81. How do you profile a Node.js app for performance bottlenecks?
ans : use the clustering to utilize all the cores of the cpu
      use the child processes to offloads the scripts that you need to run outside the main thread
      use the worker threads to execute the heavy calculation on the seperat threads
      use redis for caching
      use mongoose orm for schema validation
      use pm2 for fault tolerance
      must remove the listeners
      must clear the timers
      must use only the necessary global variables
      must use IIFEs
      must use WeakMap and WeakSet because they are weakly referenced inside the memory

82. What are common memory leaks in Node.js and how do you detect them?
ans : the incorrect implementation of closures
      not crearing the timers
      not removing the listeners
      assigning the global vairables

      to detect them use linting and formatting to set the rules

83. How does clustering work in Node.js?
ans : clustering creates multiple instance of a single application and utitlizing all the cores of the cpu
      it will help to horizontally scale the application
       clustering works on forking the instances.

84. What is the purpose of `pm2`?
ans : pm2 stands for process manager.
      This will auto start the server when it is crashed
      This will also monitoer the resouces
      This will also free the terminal after running it on the background

85. How do you scale a Node.js app horizontally?
ans : use clustering
      use child processes
      use worker threads
      use redis server
      use microservices architecture
      use reverse proxy using nginx

86. How do you optimize CPU-intensive tasks in Node.js?
ans : use the worker threads to execute these tasks outside the main thread

87. How do you handle a large number of simultaneous connections?
ansv : node js automatically improves this by using event loop and libuv which has the thread pool and IOCP for handling the network requests.

88. How does load balancing work with Node.js?
ans : load balancing distributes the traffic to the correct server
      reduce the load to a single server

89. How do you reduce startup time in large applications?
ans : using a correct builder to build quickly with the help of caching the previous build.

90. How can lazy loading help in optimizing performance?
ans : lazy loading helps to load the module in chunks
      use imports to lazy load the module
      it will increase the performance.

**Advanced Topics**

91. How does Node.js handle multithreading?
ans : nodejs not supports multithreading but it will handle multiple tasks concurrently using the builtin event loop and libuv 

92. What is a worker thread and how is it used?
ans : worker thread is used to execute the heavy calculation seperated from the main thread.

93. How do you create native addons in Node.js?
ans:  Use Node-API (N-API) or NAN to write C/C++ addons compiled with Node.js.

94. How does garbage collection work in V8?
ans : v8 has the automatic garbage collector which using the algorighm mark and sweep mark all the reachable variables and functions and release the memory of the unmarked.

95. What is the purpose of domain module (deprecated)?
ans : 

96. What are custom event emitters?
ans : event emitters used to implement the event driven architecture for the node application 
use syntax like emitter.emit('event', handler);
                emitter.on('event', handler);
                emitter.removeListener('event', handler);

97. How does the `cluster` module work in Node.js?
ans : cluster are used to create the multiple instances of a single node application scale horizontally
      cluster are fork the workers
      each workers shared the same state
      workers and master communication via IPC inter process comunication

98. What are some use-cases for using child processes?
ans : used the execute a script on command line.

99. How do you monitor your Node.js app in production?
ans : use prometheus and grafana for dashboards
      use loki for logging.

100. What are the differences between development and production builds in Node.js?
ans : development are used for developing any task
      development build using the devDependencies and nodemon

      production builds using the prod configs
      using node --watch for changes.

